	My name is Dev Singh. I am a student of class 11Th-A. This project has been written by me on the topic of, "12 lessons learned in the past 12 months". In this project, I will attempt to explain 12 events, their effect on the world and the lessons we can learn from them. The essay will begin with the topic of climate change.

	Climate change has had a profound effect on the world. It has been responsible for rising sea level, larger number of floods and the increased severity of other natural disasters. As an example, this paper will take into account the recent event of the severe cold snap, which struck Texas during December 2021 and caused a loss of power of the whole state. Many deaths were caused by this event. Independent Researchers hold the view, "the most optimistic scenario brings the total global temperature increase to 2 degree, much behind the Paris agreement goal of 1.5". From which, the following lesson can be concluded, drastic measures must be taken to stop global warming. When interviewed, the people responded with the following. "I think that global worming is a serious problem". Thus highlighting the severity of the issue. Adding onto this, the effect of the water shortage will now be discussed.

	The water shortage has only increased and it poses a big problem to the world. It has been responsible for severe droughts and dehydration that has lowered the quality of life and threatened the survival of many people across the planet. As an example, this paper will take into account the recent event of the improperly controlled abuse of water supply from large data centers. Many Gila liters of water were stolen and wasted by this event. Independent investigators have found that, "a medium sized computer data center uses as much water as 50000 people in 24 hours. Most of which is unreported as it is not used directly, but indirectly". From which, a Lesson can be drawn, we must act now to preserve our limited valuable water. Upon questioning, the public responded with the following. "This is very bad".The line given by the interviewee as an answer points at the general negative sentiment, but ultimately a lack of awareness on the topic. On a related tangent, the effect of the Covid pandemic  will now be discussed.

	The human population was not prepared for the pandemic and its effect onto the world. It has been responsible for the inflation of currency, the general devastation of the economy and it also has lowered the quality of life and threatened the survival of many people across the planet. As an example, this paper will take into account the unusually long duration of and never before seen infection rates of the virus. More people were affected by this pandemic than any other in hsitory. No disease in the last 100 years lasted this long nor spread this far. Indepent Researchers make the claim that, "covid has changed our inner thought prossec and masks/sanitizers are now a part of daily life". From which, a lesson can be concluded. covid had impacts on socity that the world was totally unprepared for. The public dissagrees with this sentiment as they belive that the swift development of vaccines is indication of preperation. In a similar top to this, the effect of the covid pandemic on mental health with reference to lockdowns will now be disscused.

	The world was unexpectedly thrown into a turblulant period of social distancing and lockdown. Humans are social creatures, we thrive through collaboration and depend of the social constructs. As an example, this paper will take into account the effect of lack of social interaction on the human mind and the mental health of the population. Indepent Researchers belive, "ithe lockdown has made us ancxious about our future and our well being". From which, it can be concluded that we should partake in acivities that make us calm and help us to relax.. The public opinoin a/d. When interviewed, the people responsed with the following. "Lock down causes negitive side effects on the human mind". thus highligthing the importance and spread of the issue. Adding onto this, the effect of the covid pandemic on students with reference to online school will now be disscused.

	We responded to the covid pandemic by initiating lockdowns. due to the lockdowns many students were unable to attend school. in order to main the some level funtion and ensure that students continued to learn their required syllabus, it was deemed nessary to convert school into an online event.there are many problems with the current method of administering online school. As an example, this paper will take into account the effect of general computer inexperience and lack of disiplne on the ability of students to learn. journalists have found, "virtual classes have caused students to slip academicly and lose connections with their friends". From which, it can be concluded that offline school is a priority. When interviewed, the public mostly agrees with this sentiment or have at least said as much in an interview. For a bit of positive reporting, record breaking development of vaccines will now be disscused.
	
	The world developed new vaccines for the virus faster than ever before. this record pace was a marvelos achivement of science. there are many benefits to the current vaccine rollout. the main benefit is the effectivness of the vaccines ,and through them, a possible end to the pandemic .Indepent Researchers hold the view, "development of vaccines and their testing are done ". From which, it can be concluded .. The public opinoin a/d. When interviewed, the people responsed with the following. "". thus highligthing the s/i of the issue. Adding onto this, our inability to distribute the vaccines equtibly shall now be disscused.
	
	Dispite the development of new vaccines for the virus faster than ever before, equtible distrobution of the vaccines was not adequtely achived. this dilema exists only because the rich countries paid in advance to get inessisarily large quantities of the vaccine, leaving very little supply for the poorer and less fortunate nations. many solutions were offered, but in the end all of the other countries had to wait for alternate sources of vaccine procurement were available. Indepent Researchers hold the view, "". From which, it can be concluded .. The public opinoin a/d. When interviewed, the people responsed with the following. "". thus highligthing the s/i of the issue. Adding onto this, our new technology for vaccines, such as mrna vaccines, shall now be disscused.
	
	In the pursuit of a safe, fast and effective vaccine, many new technologies were developed. take, for example mrna vaccines. this paper will disscus two of the newly developed vaccination technologies. Namely, we will review mrna and viral vector vaccines. Indepent Researchers hold the view, "". From which, it can be concluded .. The public opinoin a/d. When interviewed, the people responsed with the following. "". thus highligthing the s/i of the issue. Adding onto this, the safty concerns shall now be disscused.

	The testing of vaccines and other medical equipmet is a serious topic. take, for example mrna vaccines. the safety concerns of new medical technologies present a catch 22 situation.on one account, if the technology is not ready, testing on humans can cause unnessary injury. on the other hand, simulations and non-human test subjects will not present the full scope of side effects. Indepent Researchers hold the view, "". From which, it can be concluded .. The public opinoin a/d. When interviewed, the people responsed with the following. "". thus highligthing the s/i of the issue. Adding onto this, dangers of online life, shall now be disscused.

	Taking into account the increased number of people using computers and internet for school and work, the record making increse in cybersecrity issues shoud be disscused. take, for example the recenet Log4J library exploit which led to the minstry of defence of brazil being breached. the safety concerns of new attack are very severe, as more people than ever are online daily. the solution is to educate the public on the issues that thru are goning to face when oknline and making sure that developers take proactive countermeasures to stop public exploit before malicous actors can explot them. . Indepent Researchers hold the view, "". From which, it can be concluded .. The public opinoin a/d. When interviewed, the people responsed with the following. "". thus highligthing the s/i of the issue. Moving on from the digital, the problem of forced labour, shall now be disscused.

	Shifting from computers to humans, the issue of forced labour must be examined. the use of forced labour in cocoa farming to produce afoardable choclate has been going on for many decades, recently, china has begun to use the forced labour of ugyher muslims in the xinjang region for mining. these events demand the question, if the public and world governments are aware of the problem, then why have actions not been taken? the complexity of the topic is due to economics and polictics. Indepent Researchers hold the view, "". From which, it can be concluded .. The public opinoin a/d. When interviewed, the people responsed with the following. "". thus highligthing the s/i of the issue. Lastly, effect of covid on the economy will be disscused.

	Lastly, effects on the economy will be elaborated on. lockdowns reduced manufacterors ablity to build and also lessend conusmers ability to purchase. these events negitivly impacted the economy and caused widespread shortages and price inflation. the introduction of stimulus packes granted by the government to help those most effected by covid also caused moneetary inflation of every major world currency. economists still debate each other on the solution. Indepent Researchers hold the view, "". From which, it can be concluded .. The public opinoin a/d. When interviewed, the people responsed with the following. "". thus highligthing the s/i of the issue. Adding onto this, our new technology for vaccines, such as mrna vaccines, shall now be disscused.

	In conclusion, many important lessons can be learnt from the past twelve months. We should carefully learn from these lesson in order to improve our future. Thank you for your time and attentio.


